so we're
reversing aging of the eye that's not
hard at all
but we can reverse the age of the liver
or the skin
other labs are doing the spleen
thymus
through this method
what are the things that we can do today
to slow aging
so that we don't end up needing this or
so that we can live long enough that
this goes through all the safety and all
that and it becomes an actual actual
just like
standard of care procedure
well before we get into what we can do
today just because it's a continuum of
this resetting
what my lab and many others now are
doing is racing to find easier ways to
reset the age of the body
gene therapy
it's here but it's not going to be you
know mainstream soon it's always going
to be expensive
hundreds of thousands of dollars of
treatment what happens when you can take
a pill that will reset your age by a
year
happy birthday dad
take this pill incredible and if you
reset your age by a year every year
that's pretty interesting philosophy uh
and yeah
and there are experiments now where
people have reversed their dna
methylation age which we can now measure
uh by a couple of years
and that only takes a year so now people
going back at least their bloodstream is
going back younger than that year took
them forward wow
so we are on the verge of something
super interesting in humanity it opens
up all sorts of questions about what's
the world going to look like for maybe
us certainly for our kids
but getting back to what we can do every
day
the main concept that i think we all
need to remember
is that our bodies respond well to
perceived adversity
those of us who
you know like to struggle in life i know
you're that kind of guy it's don't give
up
just keep going our bodies respond well
to that as long as you're not doing long
lasting harm an adversity mimetic
which can be
don't eat so much don't eat so often
exercise be cold be hot
there are some other tweaks to that
high pressure oxygen therapy is another
theme
these put the body in a state of
adversity mimicry
and what that does to the bodies that
says oh my goodness i could be dead next
week i could run out of food i could be
you know chased down by that tribe over
the hill or a saber-toothed tiger i
gotta hunker down and
become more robust and don't put so much
energy into
these other things you know maybe wound
healing would be one thing you could
take away from for a little bit
and put it into long-term survival
those are the the roles of the sirtuins
remember the solutions do two things
they slow down aging on the dna but they
also go and repair things and if you
don't have enough so two an activity or
enough sort of two and proteins in your
body so in other words you don't make
enough of these little machines or the
ones that you have are pretty inactive
and lazy but don't have enough of the
fuel that they need to work
then you're going to age more rapidly
and when the crap hits the fan and you
get a broken chromosome then you're not
going to have as much ability to repair
that you might get cancer
and so what my role or my goal in in my
lab and in my
experiments with my body is to
make those processes that respond to
adversity super active every day so that
it's slowing down the aging process
until we have the technology to reset
the body and reverse it
so i have a gas hypothesis on why that
would work
um because you've talked about like as
we get into mtor and
some of your diet recommendations so
basically there are things like getting
into mtor which is growth if you want to
add muscle you're gonna have to get into
mtor you're gonna have to give your body
the signal to grow which times are good
there isn't these you know adverse
things um and great if you're young
great if you're trying to put on muscle
but it may have these long-term
consequences
versus putting your body into this
actually things are hard
now is not the time let's dial back
let's make sure that we stay strong and
my gut instinct is that from an
evolutionary standpoint that would be a
mechanism designed to make sure that you
live long enough for times to return to
good so that you can procreate
and that you're sort of going into like
a
semi-hibernation to like la outlast
whatever
environmental problem there is
so that you can
still be around when the environment
changes does that ring true for why this
mechanism works
it does except hibernation gives the
impression that you don't have as much
energy right and that's not true that
wasn't going to be the right word yeah
not true
people who do what i do have way more
energy than someone who sits around and
doesn't exercise and eats too much
and our bodies rev up and make more
energy so that we can repair the body we
need that energy to fix the dna and get
rid of the old proteins and survive
so think of it as hunkering down but
but also having more energy to be able
to survive anything that comes at you
and so the converse to adversity
mimetics which is what i try to do
are the abundance mimetics so you
mentioned mtor mtor will sense if you're
eating a steak lots of amino acids great
build new muscle that's going to work
but an adver abundance memetic
is not going to make you live longer we
know that you can manipulate this mtor
uh enzyme complex we call it let's call
it a gene the mtor gene you can
manipulate that
in a mouse and give it less or more of
the mtor
activity and when you do that
their lifespan changes
and the more you have of it let's say
you've now made it like the mouse is
full of abundance it'll live short
and vice versa it'll live longer if you
turn down the activity of that gene
and you can do that i mean we can't
genetically engineer ourselves easily
these days
and i say easily you can but not easily
but what you can do is by eating things
that are right you can make mtor believe
that there's adversity and turn on the
repair systems all right so what does
this adversity memetic look like from a
lifestyle perspective so you rattled off
a few things really fast but i imagine
um
diet and exercise are probably going to
be two of our most important things and
then knowing some of your views on
supplements i think we should get into
that as well
right well i do talk a lot about
the tweaks on exercise and diet but been
in a very scientific and detailed way
sometimes i feel a bit silly saying oh
diet and exercise like why is this guy
who studies
the process of aging and the molecular
basis of it talking about these
diet and exercise we've known that for
decades but what we haven't known is how
they work we just discovered that just
by looking at thousands of people who
live long and who don't and okay eat
that diet
fast that time
do that kind of exercise we know those
people live longer but we didn't know
why so now we do so we can tweak it we
can maximize the benefit of those
lifestyle changes
but it's worth pointing this out because
i think it's it's empowering
so point one is we can measure our
biological age we can look at the dna
methylation we can look at our
bloodstream i do that
and some people don't do that because
they're scared of learning their
biological age what if it's too high
what am i going to do but information
knowledge is power
and the important point number two is
that
80 percent of your longevity in your
health in old age
is controllable and only 20 is dictated
by your genes the re the genome the rest
is the epigenome that responds to how we
live
so that's why i'm all gung-ho for for
changing your lifestyle because it's
gonna it could give you two more decades
of life and i'm not kidding if you just
do the five things that doctors
recommend typically don't smoke don't
over drink get enough sleep get a bit of
exercise and don't be overweight
if you do that versus someone who
doesn't you live on average 14 years
longer and that's just the stuff we know
of
but there gets to be some really
interesting stuff that is just now at
least making my level of awareness
and
i think that some of this speaks to this
idea of the um
adversity memetic so
when you pointed out that a type 2
diabetic so diet induced lifestyle
induced diabetes
is going to live longer
than somebody without diabetes
if they're taking metformin
that's insane to me here's my hypothesis
and you'll tell us whether this makes
any sense so
insulin seems like the problem child
here and so by elevating my glucose
levels i have to pump all this insulin
into the system the insulin is
potentially damaging things somehow some
way i don't understand the mechanism but
it's over abundant presence causes
damage to the cells in some way shape or
form
by
taking metformin it's keeping my blood
glucose levels down which means that
it's going to keep my
insulin levels down and therefore i
wouldn't be doing the damage to the
system so even though i may be in taking
the things that turn into glucose
because of the use of metformin i'm
actually keeping my insulin response
down so therefore i never get that thing
that ends up damaging the system and
therefore even though i started as a
type 2 diabetic and that's why i'm on
the metformin
because of its impact on insulin i never
get the damage isn't occurring at the
level that it would even for somebody
who is not a diabetic
does that sound about right
kind of
kind of let's go back to what is
metformin metformin is a derivative of
plant molecule
that
inhibits the cell's ability slightly to
make energy and in response so it's an
accuracy on the mitochondria
yes so mitochondria in high school we
were taught that the power packs of the
cell they do a lot more they make amino
acids that make fat they do all that
stuff but we need them for energy
without mitochondria we're dead again in
30 seconds
um and the way and so i'm drawing this
because they're like little bacteria in
our cells they float around and they
make energy for us in fact
like four billion years ago uh actually
only one billion years ago uh
mitochondria were free-floating bacteria
that were subsumed by us it's crazy so
we have little pets in our body and they
have their own dna
uh which does get mutated over time the
reason metformin seems to work one of
them is that it inhibits the ability of
mitochondria to make the energy so
mitochondria are like a hydroelectric
dam
there's water but in this case it's
hydrogen atoms not water that gets
pumped into a reservoir which is between
two membranes on the outside of the of
the the bubble of the bacterium
thing
so now hydrogen atoms are really acidic
that's what acid is lots of hydrogen
protons and when you get a lot of
something it likes to equilibrate
remember that you go from a lot too
little it flows
but there's a membrane in between from
the high level to the low level in so
internal is low high is outside and the
cell puts this little
uh generator in between
that outside space in the inner space
uh the outer membrane space and the
inner membrane so this is what we call
it
and this little little power generator
sits there and those protons shoot
through a pore
in that protein
and at the bottom is a is a generator it
spins literally if the protein is
spinning
at thousands of times per second oh and
as it's spinning it's doing a chemical
reaction to make what's called atp
adenosine triphosphate doesn't matter
its name that atp is chemical energy
that we use
to to live to make things to grow
and so what metformin does is that it
reduces the
the ability of cells to
uh make that
uh those proton gradients it's called
and so you don't build up as much power
and you don't make as much atp
initially with glucose why do you give
that to a diabetic what is up my friends
i have huge news for you about one of
the most exciting and important projects
i've ever worked on in my life as you
guys know it is my mission to help teach
people about how to build a mindset and
the skills that they're going to need to
live an extraordinary life and over the
last few months i've been working hard
behind the scenes to create a brand new
tool that will help you do exactly that
it's called project kaizen and i'm proud
to announce that i'll be bringing it to
the world later this year project kaizen
is a web 3 based game like experience
that is a story based world that's going
to allow you to get inside build an
avatar that is aspirational of who you
want to become and then take the path of
the warrior seeking continuous
improvement inside of a story world and
game experience all right my friend i
cannot tell you how excited i am about
this amazing new project which i think
ushers in a whole new form of
entertainment and i want to meet you
inside of project kaizen and help you
have fun with these ideas of always
getting better right click the link and
join me in discord and until then my
friends be legendary take care peace
well what happens is
that there's a process called
mitochormesis
hormesis is adversity what doesn't kill
you makes you stronger and mido is the
mitochondria are experiencing adversity
or perceived adversities the
mitochondria are freaking out i can't
make enough energy i don't have enough
enough atp
okay and what gets activated is a
protein called
ampk ampk
is a regulator of energy in our bodies
that senses when we don't make enough
energy
and what metformin does is it comes in
and it activates that ampk
step and now the cells are freaking out
that
they're not making enough energy and in
response
they'll make more
and so you have a little drop in energy
temporarily when you take a pill
but then the cell rebounds and starts
making a lot more
energy and you actually mitochondria
will multiply you get more of these
little bacteria
in your cells so taking metformin causes
a
replication of your mitochondria yeah
okay
ampk starts
but i still don't know how this ties
into glucose
well when you when you activate ampk you
don't just make more mitochondria but
cells start to put out a new protein
that we haven't talked about new to this
chat are called glute4 and that stands
for glucose transporter number four and
it goes to the outside of the cell
right on the very what we call plasma
membrane and it sits there and now its
job is to suck the glucose out from the
liquid around so it's no longer waiting
for insulin to come around to push the
glucose into the cell it's like yo
i need glucose
to help with this energy
creation
it does and it so it makes more of this
protein but it also becomes
what we call insulin sensitive so the
little bit of insulin that you have
around if you're a type 2 diabetic
works better
okay you get more insulin receptor which
is the protein that senses insulin so
all in all what happens to that cell
just to summarize because it's a bit
complicated is that by tricking the cell
into thinking it doesn't have enough
energy it panics adversity hormesis
and it'll go now and put the protein on
the surface to grab the glucose and be
more sensitive to the hormone insulin
that tells the cell to suck it in
why is that good because then your
glucose levels in your bloodstream will
come down
and you're no longer type 2 diabetic
there are two reasons i believe why
being type 2 diabetic accelerates aging
why you don't want to have high levels
of glucose and why i try to keep my mind
you think insulin is is irrelevant in
this chain
i do it's a signaling molecule okay um i
mean over time your pancreas will suffer
because it has to make more and more of
it but that's not what's aging your
brain and your muscle and all these
other things what's going on is two
things
one is that that glucose
will attach to proteins
all the time it just sticks to it and in
fact the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes is
to look at an abundant protein in your
body in your blood that you can access
at your doctor's office
and figure out what percentage of that
protein
is stuck to glucose
and that's hemoglobin
in your red blood cells and if you've
got
five percent or less hemoglobin attached
uh to the glucose you're healthy and
then you get 6.5 you're pre-diabetic and
higher than that you're heading towards
type 2 diabetes and that's just all
about glucose attaching to proteins
and glucose attaching to proteins messes
things up
and they can really not work well but
that's really not the root cause of
aging as i've told you
what's also going on is that the high
levels of glucose
are making your cells
complacent tons of energy got lots of
this stuff going around the hormones
your brain thinks that it's good you're
swimming in treacle
and so your adversity
and repair systems the sirtuins they
don't work as hard and so your clock is
ticking faster that's why type 2
diabetics have other they don't work as
hard or they're lumbering under the
weight of glucose that's stuck to them
interestingly both so tunes will get
attached to sugar
but they also they don't
turn on like they get attached to sugar
or sugar gets attached to them sugar
gets attached to them okay yeah
but what's also a real problem is that
that adversity system is complacent
and so by keeping your glucose levels
down even at a young age well i'm not
young but even at a young age
your your body will be in this adversity
state versus abundance and
that can explain why type 2 diabetics
are older when you measure it and also
are susceptible to heart disease
dementia and even certain types of
cancer and why metformin the drug that
keeps your glucose levels down and
activates this mito hermesis defense
doesn't just protect you against type 2
diabetes
it by looking at tens of thousands of
patients who that have taken metformin
they also have lower levels of heart
disease dementia frailty and cancer
is bananas it is bananas do you take
metformin i do
so i'm going to walk through what i
think is your ideal protocol minus the
supplementation i don't want to speak to
that i'll let you add any of that other
than metformin if you think there's
something else people should do but
okay so a primarily vegetable diet
and
a big part of the reason that i think
that you recommend a primarily vegetable
diet is because
of this
adversity mimetic versus abundance
mimetic and that because red meat is so
rich in
amino acids it gives a signal to the
body that we have an abundance we can
grow and so we we're rapid growth but
we're also aging ourselves um so we want
to create this um
that little bit of a stressor
by
or i should say we don't want the signal
that we have abundance
we obviously have to eat well for
protein we're going to need to make sure
that we're getting all the protein that
we need and all of that and that you
advise in taking
vegetables that have gone through a
hormetic
trial themselves so
like with the
wine grapes that are highest in
resveratrol
they're often dehydrated and ones that
have fungus on them i guess really do
well because resveratrol i would imagine
is part of their defense mechanism it is
yeah uh and then so
any vegetables that have had sort of a
hormetic push is going to be a good idea
and you give a bunch of examples that
i've heard before like oranges i guess
if you drive a nail into the bark of the
tree like
before harvest that that helps it's so
interesting
um well olives and olive oil oleic acid
oleic acid will activate sirtuins
resveratrol
it's not a coincidence that we figured
out these kind of foods are good for us
separately but now we understand
probably how they're working too
so yes you're right so far with my
lifestyle utterly fascinating uh heat
exposure
cold exposure
um
fasting that's one that we should
probably go into a bit of detail about
so
intermittent fasting being a big one i
know that you're doing omad one meal a
day i'd ask what that meant the first
time i heard it
[Music]
and you're doing that you're still in
taking a fair amount of calories i mean
you're in good shape
but you're not withering away so i
imagine that you're roughly
[Music]
taking in enough calories to hit
maintenance levels right but only in a
single meal a day do you eat like
because i i think you eat in a two-hour
window
i'm not strict about it i have dinner
and occasionally i break down i have a
little bit of a snack in the afternoon
and occasionally as needed occasionally
i have lunch with friends occasionally i
have breakfast but
my my best days i would say probably at
least five six days a week are not
eating
maybe more than a nut a few nuts or a
nibble of chocolate until dinner and
then dinner is great but dinner is a big
meal for me
how many calories in your dinner
i don't know but i go to a restaurant
and i'm eating
multiple dishes i just don't eat dessert
i steal little bits but that's it i
avoid sugar like it's the plague
for the reason we just mentioned
[Music]
okay so
uh
you advise people to do prolonged
fasting if they can you don't personally
just because it sucks and it isn't fun
and you live your life at a very high
level and so it gets difficult and i
will second that a 24-hour fast for me
is pretty easy anything beyond that my
performance begins to decline certainly
my levels of enjoyment begin to decline
rapidly i've done a five-day fast and
after day three it's like being sick for
me at least as i've done it i'm sure i
could optimize and do it better but
i have found that trying to perform at
the level that i perform at
just has not been possible even at three
days
halfway through day two i'm like i am
not as good as i would normally be i
don't have the patience for certain
meetings that i might otherwise have
so i have a very similar response to
fasting but i i'm my average when you
take it over a week because i'm slightly
shorter on the weekends my average is
about 17 and a half hours a day 365 days
a year
some days it's 14 and other days it's
22. so it just depends on
the date but it ends up because i
tracked it really religiously for a long
time it ends up on average all things
taken into consideration 17 and a half
hours a day
um
is there a sweet spot
i'm similar
i think that's the sweet spot for for
you and me
there are sweet spots that are different
for everybody some people like breakfast
and don't care for dinner
but you want to be able to i'm actually
more like that my last meal is at 1 15
p.m
oh wow okay but what you've got now is
after after lunch you go all through the
night you've got that extended period
you want to use the night as a period of
fasting because
you're not thinking about food when
you're sleeping anyway but but also
i'm wondering if you see this too or
feel this
for a few weeks when i i started doing
this in more intensely and actually
skipping lunch
it was tough it's tough for everybody i
think because we we've got ghrelin
coming out and we we have to eat
something we're used to eating
but after three four weeks
i didn't i didn't feel like eating in
fact if i ate something i'd get a little
bit woozy or brain fog
and what i saw when i was measuring it
so i've done
uh the levels health thing on my arm
so there's a glucose monitor continuous
glucose monitor on the phone
that when you start your bodies doesn't
know what to do
hungry you're losing glucose you feel
tired you're hungry
but what happens over time after three
weeks is you steady out and your liver
wakes up and learns that it needs to do
a job its job which is in part making
sugar for your body glucose but
our livers are much smarter than our
eyes and our mouths much
and and continuous your liver my liver
if you measure it during the day i
showed you graph earlier when we were
talking
the the line through the day is really
steady in this zone
and that's why i can power through the
day i don't feel over energetic i don't
feel lethargic i don't even feel hungry
but
there's a really important point which
is it's individual
the other important point is that you
just
you need to get through the hard part in
the beginning yeah i don't think people
will believe you nor will they really
understand what it means to become
metabolically flexible so that you can
burn glucose or ketones and when you do
it though it changes your relationship
to hunger it's not that i don't know
that i'm hungry it's that it doesn't
create any sense of urgency i'm not
distracted i'm not like oh my god i have
to eat it's just oh yeah wow i guess i
haven't eaten in a long time it and no
one will believe you until they've done
it and i remember when i first went low
carb and this wasn't even me quite going
keto but when i first went low carb i
had a headache and i was so angry and i
remember saying to my wife if i had a
cookie i would feel better and
that was true it would have made me feel
better but on the other side of that was
you finally break your
metabolic dependency on sugar and now
you can burn either glucose or ketones
because i used to measure my ketones all
the time
and i would i could predict
with pretty high degree of accuracy when
i was over 0.5 when i was around one or
if i was north of one
and
because you feel differently it's pretty
crazy yeah it's fun to do the glucose
monitoring because
you can look on your phone and and you
know how you feel
and i could very quickly see that if i
ate normally like a normal
uh american
a big breakfast
huge spike in glucose goes up uh
over 150 200 yep makes per deciliter and
i'm feeling wired and i've got caffeine
in my body so okay i've got a couple of
hours of
hyper
and then i'd have this crash i'd feel
terrible i need to go to sleep i didn't
sleep well enough i can't think i need
to get a snack to get back to where i
was
and then i look at my phone and i can
see that i'm in this crash i've gone not
just you know my levels are here i've
gone below that and now i'm feeling
hungry i'm weak
and then what do i do what does
everybody do i get i need a snack i need
a protein bar or something
and then shoot straight back up
our days if on a normal meal a
normal american diet is like that yeah
and it's highs and lows and highs like
it's horrible horrible you've got to
break that cycle and just do the yeah
and then you know a little bit in the
evening food is required we're not
talking about salvation or malnutrition
here right but tom the one thing i think
is really important to tell everybody
who isn't doing this
um is that i'm really lazy when it comes
to life i really am it's surprising i've
gotten where i am
i know the feeling and very well
but what i i am pretty stubborn and i
like to do things to a point where at
least i've satisfied myself that i can
do something
but i like meat i love meat i vegetables
for me were garnish for most of my life
i love the taste of meat i would love if
meat was life prolonging
i'd be the happiest guy
but i've now learned a that that that
vegetable at least plant focused you can
eat some meat and fish preferably
it's not going to hurt you but
a carnivorous mainly carnivorous diet
there's really no evidence that in the
long run that's healthy unfortunately
so i've switched
and i'm very happy with it i do enjoy
a mostly plant-based diet now
exercise
i freaking hate exercise
i'm joe average or worse
i do not like the feeling of being out
of breath at all
i like lifting weights because at least
i don't lose my breath but
i'm lazy i have to force myself to go to
the gym every day
when i do it which isn't every day by
the way
so if i can do it
anybody should be able to do this it's
just a matter of willpower and getting
into the habit of doing that and letting
your body adjust
talk to me about this notion of
resetting the biological clock how do we
do that what's the mechanism and
so obviously i'm going hungry
occasionally exercise is going to help
but i know that you have a regiment that
i'll lovingly call a regiment of drugs
or precursors to things that we can take
what can we do to reset that biological
clock
well there are different levels to
resetting aging there are three levels
that we know of the first is pretty easy
to reset or to to manipulate these are
the proteins that turn
genes on and off very quickly we call
them transcription factors
and they
they basically read a gene and make a
protein that's what they do
that's level one that's easy go a little
bit hungry
that'll change level two is a little bit
harder the level two is not just
changing which genes are quickly turned
on and off but actually
silencing genes for for a long time and
this is where my enzymes that we work on
the sirtuins come into play
let's go back to the pacman they clip
off acetyls off these packing proteins
you spool up the hose and it becomes
becomes locked in that gene gets
silenced for a long time so to do that
you can exercise you can diet but you
also i think you need a little bit of
help as well
what gets really interesting and this is
something
most scientists don't even know about
yet is level three the deep layer of
aging
there's actually a dna clock that tells
our bodies how old we are we i could
take your blood and read it
and i could tell you roughly when you're
going to die
what yeah we can do that what are you
looking for we're looking for chemical
groups that get added and subtracted to
our dna mole the long string in the cell
you get chemical modifications in
predictable ways as you get older
starting from conception so even in the
womb even as a kid even as a teenager
you're aging based on this clock that
goes up linearly and where you fit on
that line
is very accurate that tells you your
biological age but how do you know when
the person is going to die is that just
based on
straight lines is it actuarial tables
though the human average human lifespan
is 86 and is that what you mean or is
there could you see something specific
in my line that would say
you're headed for 68 sorry
no it's not not specific but what it's
based on is machine learning based on
thousands of people's
code of methylation on the genome and
comparing that to their health and their
date of death oh [__] that's so
interesting so if you were to take my
blood right now what would you look for
exactly we would read the methylation
the kemp these are chemicals hydrogen
and oxygen bound to the dna chemically
physically bound
and those accumulate as you get older in
very predictable ways in fact they're so
predictable
that we can use the same clock
to measure the dog's age and a human's
age whoa
all based on methylation right okay what
causes methylation
well there are two classes of enzymes
the ones that add the methyl chemicals
and those that subtract it okay
how do i take a boatload of ones that
subtract it ah that's what we're working
on
now here's the key level two aging reset
which we can do by some of the things
that i'm doing in my life yeah probably
you are too
those aren't permanent changes you can't
just do that and expect that
take take one treatment and you go on
living for another 10 years okay because
level two isn't as permanent it's
somewhat permanent than level one
but level three is truly permanent it
you could reset yourself ten years
and then go back and then wait another
10 years and potentially reset the clock
again if you know how to do that and
we're just starting to figure out how to
do that okay
so level one diet exercise cool got it
level two
uh metformin you taking metformin right
okay so
i've talked about this on the show
before but explain what is metformin why
is it prescribed to diabetics and now
why is a seemingly rash of non-diabetic
people taking it
yeah so there are three main pathways
that regulate aging in animals and
probably in ourselves
there are the sirtuins that i've talked
about a lot today
there's one called mtor which responds
to how much amino acids or how many
amino acids are in your body it will
hunker down and protect the body the
fewer amino acids it has access to
okay okay then the third is called ampk
and this is the energy sensor when your
body has low levels of energy
it will allow the body to hunker down
and protect itself from diseases but why
ampk is worth mentioning is
this is one of the targets as we call it
of the drug metformin metformin will
activate this ampk pathway and make the
body think that it's hungry when often
it's not and also keep your blood sugar
levels
more steady why would i uh hungry at a
cellular level or i actually experience
hunger at a certain level okay but it
also has an an interesting side effect
is from for a lot of people myself
included it's a bit harsh on the stomach
so it also reduces my appetite but
what's great about metformin is that
it's been in millions of people for a
few decades so we know the side effects
they're relatively i'm sorry really fast
so metformin is creating at a cellular
level the sense that i'm hungry and
you're saying that from a hormesis
perspective of a little bit of bad it's
like stressing the system and that's why
we think it works it is it's exactly
doing that and so that it actually helps
the body respond in a way to boost the
energy supply uh so one thing it does
that's that's undeniable is it boosts
the level
the numbers of
mitochondria it actually
creates additional mitochondria so your
cells are getting more efficient or more
able to generate energy
right over the long run but in the short
run what it does is it actually poisons
part of the mitochondria
so it's it's a little bit of poison that
leads to benefits down the line
what part is poisoned
uh it's called complex one so that there
are protons that are
in one part of the area of the
mitochondria in a in a membrane region
and you the cell builds up protons it
becomes really acidic in that region but
they the cell wants to release them
so what they do is they put little pores
in between the membranes so they can
leak from the high concentrated zone to
the low concentration in the middle
and as they pass through that pore
it spins the pore around and that
spinning physical spinning of that
protein will generate chemical energy
called atp
that's how atp is created and without
atp we're dead in about 10 seconds yeah
okay
that's crazy interesting uh and you're
saying sorry to go back to the poison
the poison is elevating those levels
which is causing more to go it's
actually decreasing atp in the short run
so the cell says man i haven't got
enough chemical energy in atp so that's
what forces it to create more
mitochondria right so that's the
poisoning part it is so the increased
number of mitochondria is in response to
the slight poisoning exactly but there
are two other important points the cells
in our body also
think that they need to become more
sensitive to insulin yeah which keeps
our glucose and sugar levels more steady
okay yeah that's key because that's what
helps the diabetes type 2 diabetics
recover
and you know prevents the disease from
getting worse yes the second is that
it's just been discovered in humans that
if you take metformin
a lot of it and exercise it can blunt
the effects of exercise on building
mitochondria
what we think is going on is that
you don't want to always have metformin
in your system or your body won't have a
chance to recover from that slight
poison
i'm not going to prescribe anything i'm
not a doctor but we think
it's best better to take metformin on
days that you're not exercising and
recovering
and pulse it again so you've got
metformin exercise metformin exercise
right i know you're not prescribing
anything but
uh
how many days are you taking it how many
days you not how often are you
exercising how often are you not
um i actually spent a lot of my 30s and
40s not exercising at all it's crazy
right someone like me
uh but i've become better at it now that
i'm you know i was approaching 50 now
i'm 50.
uh so i i spend uh about four hours in
the gym on the weekend with my son
benjamin dude like two hours a day no
four hours straight but it's not all
exercise okay so it's an hour with my
trainer sean who does mostly a
combination of weights and stretching
um
some free weights some machines
then it's another hour on my own with my
son we do some treadmill some more
stretching and essentially just muck
around doing stuff that's fun for him
and then we also then we do
some
some yoga downstairs in the gym a little
bit of relaxation but the best fun part
that i really love is at the end we do a
sauna
hot tub
cold bath sauna hot tub cold bath for
about an hour
and i feel fantastic talk to me about
that so in your book you go into cold
exposure you said you moved to boston it
sucked coming from australia and you
bundled up and now you wish you hadn't
um
why cold exposure is cold and hot both
necessary what's the difference well
there are a few reasons one is the high
level view is that anything that
stresses your body puts it into a state
of shock is good in the long run but a
little bit of
perceived adversity being a little bit
too hot a little bit too cold and
especially the gradient between those
two which is why we jump from one to the
other the next point is that i've looked
at the literature
and at first when uh i was prompted by
my publisher to look into this
scientifically they said you know what
about this cryotherapy what do you think
and a couple of years ago i had no idea
that this was real it sounded like
[__] to me
but i looked into it and there were
there are two important things one is
cryotherapy or cold
exposure we'll build up what's called
brown fat
we didn't know brown fat existed in
humans until about five years ago
typically it's across your back and in
other reasons you can see with a pet
scan but otherwise it's pretty invisible
just looks like fat
but brown fat's particularly healthy
because it it has a lot of mitochondria
and we think it also secretes little
proteins that tell the rest of the body
to be healthy in what way to be healthy
uh we're not sure yet we're not sure
it's interesting oh man i want the
answer to that question but it certainly
revs up your metabolism and will burn
energy if you're looking to stay lean
having a bit of brown fat is all good so
my my friend ray cronus and i have
written on this and andrew bremer and at
the nih we call it the metabolic winter
hypothesis and essentially it's saying
that in our lifestyles these days we're
always warm i'm wearing this jacket we
sleep with the covers on we turn up the
heat we never get exposed to coal unless
we we force ourselves to
and we think that that's possibly
largely responsible if not you know
maybe partly perhaps largely
responsible for the diabetic problem we
have
what okay so
if if you're cold at night you're going
to burn a lot more energy staying
warm yes turn on your brown fat
now that's going to keep people lean if
we bundle up and and we eat the kind of
diets that that uh we see in the
supermarket that's going to be doubly
bad for our bodies yeah we're warm we're
not losing energy and we're eating a lot
more
yeah this is this stuff is so
interesting okay so
what's your advisor i whatever you're
about to tell me no i'm going to do it
so like
how frequently do i want to be doing it
is it every day what's that look like
well what i do is because i'm busy and i
don't have a sauna or a cold tub at home
i subject myself to this stuff
for about an hour on sundays
and what i do is i spend about 15
minutes at 150 degrees
fahrenheit well that's
reasonably intense but you get used to
it uh then we go into the steam room
um you know we're sitting there chatting
it's great uh temperature is lower in
the steam room because humidity is is
saturated
the roof's dripping on you hot water
but that that i i don't know if the
steam helps but i certainly love the
feeling of being in there and my skin
starts to be healthier because of course
it's cleaning itself out
and then the final thing i do is hot tub
pretty hot hot water and then and then i
go and dunk
below the water
a couple of times in water that's less
than four degrees celsius
so that that's so cold that it takes
your breath away yeah yeah but it's
great
interesting was there anything else on
level three that we should know about
yes
um so work that we've done recently uh
just in the last year is finding ways to
tweak the cells and the tissues of of
mice at least to reset the clock
we've been working for 10 years as i
said accelerating the clock we can drive
that hand of the clock forwards now we
we cut the dna of the animal let it heal
and in doing so we distract those
proteins from where they come from so
we're
disturbing this survival circuit so much
that we disrupt the spooling of the dna
and what we got was an old mouse by
every account based on histology which
is looking at the tissues based on their
physiology they got gray they got
arthritis they got heart disease even
and when we look at the molecular clock
that uh methylation clock they were 50
percent older communications they had
more like clumps everywhere those methyl
groups were added to the dna
right right okay so we had given them
heart disease and alzheimer's or
dementia we'd given them all these
diseases but by measuring the clock what
we had actually done is give them aging
but that that was the first step that
took 10 years the last year we've been
asking how do you get the hands to go
backwards that's a lot harder but we
were fortunate that
the 2012 nobel prize was one for the
ability to reverse that clock in cells
it's called
was the prize awarded to shinya yamanaka
a japanese fellow
very smart guy and he found
at least four genes that when you put
into say skin cells of an adult if you
gave me your skin cells i could go back
to laven basically clone you i could
take your cells make a stem cell pool
and i could grow you into a new little
liver or a new little kidney that's all
easy not easy but it's doable it's
doable
what that tells us is that those four
yamanaka genes
can reset age if i can take someone
who's in like you who's in their early
40s and make a new you as we've done now
for many species
dogs cats sheep
monkeys
those animals we can reset the clock
hundred percent and those animals
actually live a normal lifespan that
tells us that the instructions to be
young are still in the cell somewhere
as though there's a backup hard drive
that tells the epigenome those spools
how to go back to be young again and get
those methyl groups back to being young
again not up here but back there but
don't strip them off too far to be a
stem cell or i'll basically turn you
into the world's giant tumor yeah
okay so one why do i become a tumor
because a tumor is a cell that doesn't
know to stop so what is it that you're
breaking in that process that that makes
it
so um dysfunctional yeah so in terms of
the clock let's just start with that
shiny yamanaka wound the clock so far
back it went back to zero back to
midnight that we do not want to do
because the cells lose their identity
and that's the last thing we want to do
we don't want to go back to us because
it's dangerous to have a pluripotent
stem cell in the wrong place in the body
of course it'll grow it won't stop
growing but why doesn't why why does it
become a tumor why doesn't it become a
liver or a lung like i would get the
problem of having a liver develop in my
brain but i'm just saying like why does
it become a tumor cell instead of an
actual functioning liver
uh well so when you go back far enough
and it loses its identity
it will just multiply
into a mass without cellular identity so
there's something else going on that
stops it from figuring itself out right
so in the lab if we take a pluripotent
stem cell and we want to make a liver
cell or a neuron
a nerve cell we give it a bunch of
chemical signals in what we call the
niche and when one of these cells lands
in a niche around
those old cells they'll use that stem
cell to rebuild tissue but imagine if we
could reset the clock not all the way
back to a stem cell but just partial
reset the clock so
so that you could go back to being 20
again right that's what we're able to do
in some tissues in the mouse right now
you do it on mass
when it's cell by cell dna strand by dna
strand like
how the hell do you get this to take
effect
through a whole joint let alone the
whole body yeah right now the way we do
it is
we inject a virus called an aav and this
virus will target certain tissues and
deliver the genes to most of the cells
in that tissue
for example we are treating aging of the
eye in mice so we can take an old mouse
we deliver a virus the av into the eye
tiny little prick
it's the same virus that that's used to
correct genetic deficiencies in the eye
right now
fda approved drugs so this isn't science
fiction this is out there in in the
world right now
we give it give it to the old mice we
give them an answer about it antibiotic
called doxycycline okay same thing you
might take if you got lyme disease
and that turns on these reprogramming
factors we don't use all four of the
factors oskm they're called because one
of them
causes cancer
the m we leave off the m we put osnk
into the eye turn it on
leave it for a few weeks
measure what happens to the eye and
those mice can see again like they were
young
so we've tested three different types of
damaged damage to the eye the first one
we did was a hail mary so the a lab near
ours across the road works on
rejuvenating the spine and the optic
nerve which is crazy yeah because we
know as soon as you're
you know a couple of months old you're
not going to regrow a spine it's one of
the first parts of the body that ages in
fact
but jellyfish can regrow axolotls can
regrow an arm we lose that ability when
we're very very young so we the question
was if we turn the clock back a lot
without osk genes will those nerve cells
be young enough to regrow back to the
brain if we damage them and that was the
experiment they pinched the back of the
optic nerve so that the nerves were
defective and they started to die back
towards the brain because the mice lost
their vision we then turned on our
reprogramming factors we now see that
the nerves get young again
wind the clock back and they regrow back
to the brain
we could give ourselves the healing
ability that we only had when we were
embryos
and you start to think about what could
this lead to if we can do this safely of
course safe is the important word across
the body imagine one day you could have
every cell in your body able to be
rejuvenated like that you cut yourself
you break a bone
you lose your your mind you have a
dementia you take a course of
doxycycline for a few weeks and then
stop switch it off again and you you
heal
if you turn it on at high levels there's
a lab in spain that has shown that you
can get small tumors in some animals in
the kidney so we've been very careful to
not just blast the cell with these
factors permanently
we've titrated what we said brought the
levels down to very low levels and
switch it off when we don't need it
but we have given mice
uh this virus throughout the body we
inject it into a vein and we turn it on
we've left it on now expecting the mice
to die
a year later they're perfectly fine wow
so it appears to be safe but of course
there's a lot more work to do i'm a
scientist and i'm developing drugs i
have to be very aware of the dangers
sure please nobody go out and try this
at home at all until we know more but
the eye is a good testing zone because
it's it's protected and if there's a
problem it's you know it's shielded from
the rest of the body it won't go too far
but everything we know now is that it
seems to be very safe at least in the
eye wow this is crazy so that is
is there an element of getting better
improvement human performance or
anything that
you can tease us with
well we've actually published results
that in mice if you give them
an nad booster molecule that will turn
on these pac-man enzymes called the
sirtuins
those mice when they're old can now run
fifty percent further in fact some of
our old mice ran so far that the
treadmill stopped because mice are not
supposed to run more than three
kilometers we haven't talked about nad
yet tell me what nad is what are the
precursors how do i supplement for it
uh so there are a few on the market i
don't endorse or sell anything just by
the way even if you see me on line
that's not me
so that said there are there's one
called nr
which is stan which stands for
nicotinamide riboside
which is a very early precursor to
making nad in the body there's an
intermediate from that called nmn
not to be confused with m m's please
don't do that that's not healthy
um and then the cell turns nmn into nad
and you can take
all three actually and or each one of
those three and raise nad levels in
animals and now we're doing myself and
many others are doing human studies and
we've seen that
nr and in my case nmn does raise the
energy levels of older people and and
young people alike up to levels that we
think you could rarely achieve even with
uh being a marathon runner that's crazy
so just to bring this home for people
talk to me about your dad and his uh n
of one experimentation with nmn yeah
so my father has been on the same
regiment as me resveratrol for over a
decade the red wine molecule
he's been on metformin longer than me
because he had he was a borderline
diabetic type 2 diabetic
and he's also on anime now
and he seems to be doing great he's now
80. when he was in his 70s he was he was
slowing down his he was starting to say
the same things twice
you know typical 70 year old
um he's doing great now he's 80 he's got
a new lease on life he started a new
career down in sydney he's hiking at the
world right now he's traveling around
america driving his elderly friend
around his friend unfortunately ended up
going to the hospital the last few days
so my father is taking care of his
friends who he's seeing
on the decline and he's if anything
improving every year
i'd love to hear more about resveratrol
which is something that i've completely
written off until i started researching
you um it seemed for a red hot minute
like it was real and then it seemed to
completely die and i know that you got
sort of caught in the middle of some of
this stuff
so
where has all the forget like what pop
culture thinks of it like what's the
reality of it yeah so resveratrol was a
proof of concept molecule back in 2003
the first of its kind that could mimic
caloric restriction
make mice healthy on a high fat western
diet and it was it was a great proof of
something that we were trying to figure
out and it led to drugs that went into
humans that looked really promising
i got embroiled in a scientific
and a a corporate war
song in the case of pfizer they put out
a scientific paper that said
essentially everything that david has
said is wrong
okay and then that was a great headline
harvard scientists started companies
is wrong okay and you know and then i
spent about a week in bed saying [__]
the world
you know why am i doing this why am i
working so hard for society if they
don't care but i worked my way out of
bed i thought let's dig deep and see if
they're right or if we're right
and so for another three years we really
worked hard in my lab at harvard to test
whether we were right so the question
was
with this pac-man that spools the dna
does resveratrol work on it or is it
working on something else
and that to scientists is really
important because if it's not working on
this
all the drugs that we're trying to work
on this are probably working
um
the wrong way that we thought
to cut a long story short what we found
and published in the journal science
which is one of the top you can do
and i say that because it's
validated science
is that we show that resveratrol does
bind to the pac-man and it is
responsible for this and we now have new
information that we haven't published
but i'll tell your audience about it
we've made a mouse that is resistant to
activation of the pac-man
we can tweak the enzyme just in one
amino acid in that protein out of about
a thousand
that blocks this movement activation
it's normally chewing like this
but if we add resveratrol to a normal
mouse it'll do that to our mutant mouse
it's this and which is better
the rapid munching rapid munching's
better okay because the rapid was we
think was responsible for the health
benefits and the longevity so what
you're showing is by slowing it down you
cause real problems and thusly if you
have resveratrol on there and get it
munching really fast that you've done
something positive right and our mutant
mouse should be resistant to the
benefits of resveratrol if we're right
but if pfizer is right then resveratrol
should still provide benefits even
though this enzyme because it's working
on some other some other way got it so
the mouse that could not be sped up the
mutant mouse does not live longer when
given resveratrol on its high fat diet
interesting so that will be the
punctuation mark the fu we were right
but but interestingly the world has
moved on
right well i'm i'm left to clean up the
pieces right
yeah so and when you say the world has
moved on you're talking about people
like me who just assumed that it was
garbage and that it's not real and right
okay so um you've said that the only
supplement you take is vitamin d um so
how are you getting resveratrol in the
system is it a drug do you have to have
it prescribed
uh well i'm taking resveratrol i have um
and would we call that a supplement sure
and it's commercially available
uh it is if it's a legitimate seller and
it's 98 plus percent pure it it seems to
be
similar to what i take
and ballpark how much do you take
um i take a teaspoon into my yogurt
that's probably close to a gram every
day every day yeah okay
uh resveratrol roughly a gram
are you taking nmm or is nmn or is that
just your dad uh both of us okay and
then um metformin
right those three anything else those
are the main
things that i think are helpful and i've
been monitoring my blood by chemistry so
i and you said you took an mri of your
heart right which i love
what are things that we should be
testing assume for a second i'm willing
to go all the way do any crazy test to
know if what i'm doing is working um
what would you recommend
well i avoid x-rays and ct scans unless
i have to sure right
if your doctor says go for it please
don't refuse that but otherwise don't do
it for fun don't do it because you're
curious
because those ct scans will break your
dna and when we we break the mouse's dna
it's a its age goes up by 50 percent so
whoa right so avoid dna breaks as much
as possible
um what i do is i take a blood test from
a company called inside tracker which in
full disclosure i invested in years ago
and they look at about 30 parameters in
your blood and give you feedback it's
doctor supervised so it's it's legit and
it's based on a lot of science
and that at least gives you some
feedback
about your body about what's actually
happening if you change your lifestyle
or you take a supplement or even a new
drug for that matter so you've got to
have you've got to be monitoring because
you don't you don't want to fly blind
you don't know if for you you're doing
harm or doing good
um so do do a blood test at least go to
your doctor and have a blood test for
for a good goodness sake
you could have your genome sequenced or
do something that looks at the the
variance in your genome for relatively
little cost i think it's 99 now
i gave a test of that kind to my whole
family as christmas present
and what we've learned is that some of
our members lab members are not lab
members family members have variants
that predict longevity some don't some
have mutations in their genome that are
a little bit scary
down the line you could get your dna
methylation age determined the true
what's called the horvath clock
some people measure their telomere
lengths
um
did you have a biopsy to do that or can
you do it from blood blood blood test is
fine what is up my friend tom bill you
here and i have a big question to ask
you how would you rate your level of
personal discipline on a scale of one to
ten if your answer is anything less than
a ten i've got something cool for you
and let me tell you right now discipline
by its very nature means compelling
yourself to do difficult things that are
stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact i will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right i've just released a class from
impact theory university called how to
build ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work i will see you inside
this workshop from impact theory
university until then my friends be
legendary peace out
for a long time i was really focused on
living forever and that was the dominant
thing i thought about as i mapped out my
life and then about a year or two ago it
started to feel more important to
recognize my mortality and part of it
was i i had really lost faith that it
was going to happen in my lifetime
and
i definitely want it to happen in
researching you for this episode i am
regaining belief that it we really may
hit health escape velocity in my life
and so in the first half of the show i
want to talk about um why we age exactly
and you've gotten extraordinarily good
at mapping that out with real conviction
and then in the second half we'll talk
about what we can do on an individual
level to really slow that down
or possibly even reverse it so i want
people to stick with me because i'm
actually going to start with a story and
a quote
and
i want to make sure that people
know the map of where we're going
so first the story on christmas eve
i was
throwing a little party for my family
and it was a poker party we had a dealer
come he was 40 years old
and the energy's high imagine balloons
everywhere it was actually a birthday
party happens to be somebody's born in
my family on new christmas eve
and i go into the kitchen to get a drink
and my wife runs in and says we think
the dealer's having a heart attack
she's like you need to get in there
right now and so i rush in to the room
where this is all set up and he's just
sitting there holding his head like this
and i said i don't think he's having a
heart attack i think he's having a
stroke
and
you know long story short he ends up not
surviving oh no and so
he was in a um coma for i guess five
days and and they end up taking him off
life support life support and he passes
away and i was like this guy is 40.
and so
the question really becomes how do we
get good at understanding where we're at
biologically what is our real age not
our as you say not the number of times
that the earth has gone around the sun
but how old are we really from uh
uh the things that we can measure and
are they giving us real information so
that's the story now the quote this is
you in your own podcast this is a quote
pulled from your first episode
in my lab now we can control aging very
precisely at will we can speed it up as
fast as we want in an animal and even
reverse it so aging is now controllable
we have the technology to control how
fast we age we can measure that slow it
down and even reverse it it's going to
fundamentally change the course of human
history i have the [__] chills man
so
that's a big statement it's a bold
statement and what i want to do now is
walk through what do we know
how do we measure it and then we'll
later get to what we do about it but i'm
a big believer if you understand the
mechanisms you can make change
what are the mechanisms why for real why
do we age yeah
yeah so when i wrote my book lifespan um
it was a theory
um about why we age and when i boiled it
down
to its essence
i realized and i theorized that aging
was a loss of information
so in our body we have two types of
information when we're born or even when
we're conceived there's the one that we
all know about we can get our dna red
that's the genome
but there's this other layer called the
epigenome
and why is that important because if you
just have dna and there's six feet of it
in every cell
it's just a chemical it's not going to
give you life
what gives you life
is the the system that reads the dna the
right way but we've got this chemical
that's
like a hard disk driver or flash memory
that has these letters
atcg that's it period they're just four
four chemicals that get strung in
different order
and the cell can write those down can
build those chains and that's how we
copy the dna i don't i i run the risk of
taking us off track here but i'm very
curious how where does it get the
letters
the the enzyme or the protein enzyme
proteins
synonyms yeah okay so where does the
protein go great is there a bucket of
letters like i had as a kid that it like
reaches into and grabs one of the
letters out there are
yeah they're floating around and then
there's literally atcgs
they are
we're filled with the building blocks of
dna and proteins one are the dna bases
atcg they float around
and because they're just floating around
they're
buzzing around and so an enzyme
sees
probably 10 000 molecules in a second
it's really quick and it picks the ones
it wants so okay i want an a and it's
it's basing it's looking at the dna and
it says you need a c right now and it
reaches out grabs a c you need a g now
it grabs the g that's literally what's
happening yes that is insane i cannot
believe i've never asked that question
that you're freaking me out all right
keep going and how does it know whether
it's a g or a c to put down
because it's copying the dna you've got
one strand that has the actg
and that protein will
look for what matches the g and a g
always matches a c
and an a always matches a t
so there are pairs of dna that make the
rungs in that ladder of that spiral that
double helix
but you
generally you actually need a template
that's why you have double strands one
of them is a template the other one you
then match to that
in the other direction so it's not like
my fly here which is a zipper that goes
up
it's a zipper that does
that as it's being built interesting uh
but we we get that from our parents
right without any dna there's nothing to
copy
getting back to the memory there's
something i think you'd like to hear
because you're very much into
digital and nft world
it turns out that
the best way to store memory now is
biologically
in a little test tube we can store all
of human information
and we we're built what we but humanity
is building the machines
to write down
those letters
and store all the world's information in
order and then the readers to get that
information back out so why is that
important because
computers don't last for a thousand
years and you can't fit
all the world's
data in a test tube but technology is
pretty much there to be able to do that
whoa
okay so that's insane
going back to the reader the reader is
that little um
protein enzyme that's grabbing the
the matching pairs
and building it up and so all day long
it's just like here's a half and i need
to match that half
is that the idea yeah well there are two
things you can do with dna you can copy
the dna so that the cell has extra
chromosomes that then divide and you
have new cells
that's copying the genetic material but
then you can also use the gene um so
it's a string of a few thousand of those
letters
to make more protein
and so instead of make copying it making
dna this is where rna comes in so we've
heard about rna based vaccines mrna
is one type
the cell makes the mrna it's called
messenger rna because it's a messenger
and now that message which might be a
thousand of these letters floats away
from the chromosome and another machine
grabs that and now has its own template
to grab not dna bases not the atcg but
amino acids 20 of them so it's
programmed to look for these
um sentences basically so rather than an
individual letter i'm here for a whole
sentence or a maybe even a chapter it
tells me to do
something and is that something to
create a new protein is that what all of
these do mostly okay mostly you can you
can make
rnas and you can make uh protein but and
dna but mostly
we're pretty much made of protein those
proteins are either structural from
muscle or they carry out chemical
reactions making new dna making proteins
making lipids making energy without
making energy both of us would be dead
in less than 30 seconds we need to
always be making it
it's quite uh we're always thirty
seconds away from death as you mentioned
life is tenuous when you get down to
that level
um
and so what what happens with aging is
that the ability of the cell to know
which genes to read
goes awry
those proteins that would normally turn
on a gene that makes a brain cell know
to be a brain cell
get lost those proteins instead of
reading the brain cell gene
will go off and get distracted and start
reading a liver gene or a skin cell gene
okay so now here's where i think we have
to get away from metaphor distracted and
now get into and i know your theory
quite well because i've gone through it
so many times
but there's a part of it that i don't
understand well and that's the sirtuins
so
since we haven't said that word yet
today
talk to me or explain what is the
when the the reading of the information
begins to go wrong
what happens that causes that to go
wrong because it's not like the
the protein gets bored and starts
watching baseball right so it's not
distracted in that way but there
actually is something going on that we
can actually see and understand
what is that thing
well so the sirtuins we have seven of
these genes that make seven different
proteins in our cells each one
uh they're very ancient so the sirtuin
actually controls which genes are on and
off okay so the spooling of the dna yeah
so so that six feet of dna is not just
flailing around
in liquid that would not be life what
the cell does from conception and before
that tell people why that wouldn't be
life you threw that off but that's
actually really fascinating so if the
dna is just a fully naked strand that
can be read in its entirety you don't
have life that isn't self-evidently
clear
why wouldn't that be life
well you need to organize it very well
because we're multicellular a bacterium
doesn't need to worry about it because
it's just one cell it knows what it
needs to do
and its offspring are very similar
our bodies are made of a trillion cells
and each one
literally is different
right even if you measure an adjacent
cell it's behaving slightly differently
but if you take a brain cell a nerve
cell compared to a liver cell it's
totally different but remember they have
that same six feet of dna
so what we need to do as multi-solar
organisms to survive
is to get rid of not rid of but but hide
and compact and silence
parts of our dna that are not useful for
that cell type so the reader isn't told
your job is to read and recreate liver
cells it's told read whatever is exposed
and there's some other mechanism this is
your job is to hide everything that
isn't a liver cell and that's a sirtuin
the sertune is the one that hides
everything yeah and sir stands for
silent information regulator
and that was the clue to this whole
information theory of aging it was right
there in the name
and what we find is that those spools so
if you zoom let's zoom up on the genome
now you'll see that most of it is
compacted because most of the genome is
is not used
we use a few percent of it the genome is
another word for your strand of dna
correct yes so most of it is bundled up
in these little packages and when we say
it's bundled up is it put in something
or is it just squished together in a way
that's impossible to read
it's really
precisely packaged there are four
proteins called histones okay and they
make a circular little ball
and they love dna so what happens is the
dna wraps around those histones so you
get
two wraps around one histone and it's
wrapped around by a certain
in part in part but there are there are
enzymes that
do this as well more machines that grab
dna and wrap it around twice grab
another histone stick it next to it and
wrap it around more
so it's like spooling you're wrapping
string around a ball and then you get
these balls on a string it's called
and that for the technically minded is
called chromatin and if you take those
balls on a string and then wrap those up
into bigger bundles
eventually you get what we call a
chromosome which you can see with your
eye or at least with a pretty weak
microscope
this is incredible
we start bundling it we have the
sirtuins
their job is to silence the vast
majority of the information on the dna
and then we have this other enzyme that
comes in and it its job is to read what
is exposed so the information theory is
you've got the whole
all the possible things hey you're an
eye cell you're an eyebrow you're a
heart cell you're a brain cell you're an
amygdala brain cells so it's like all of
these incredibly specific instructions
[Music]
and they're all linked together and so
what we have to do is come up with some
very intricate clean way of
making sure that the right information
is read at the right time and the
solution that nature has given us is
this wrapping of the bundling of dna i
think is the word that most people use
to make it impossible to read everything
but certain sections but what parts of
the bundle are exposed are epigenetics
at work which are based on environmental
cues that we give our body
well kind of epigenetics refers to all
those machines that bundle up the dna
and read the dna that's the epigenetic
system
it's like um
in a computer the code would would be
one thing and then all the machinery to
read that code which is the computer
um is the epigen epigenome so which is
kind of complex you can't say oh that's
an epigenome protein there are hundreds
but certains are major players
and they from birth say that this gene
needs to stay off because
it's a liver gene that's working
shouldn't work in the brain so don't
expose it don't expose it so we've got
bundles bundles bundles a big loop
bundles bundles bundles and some of
these loops are really important for
when we're developing as an embryo
one of these big loops it's called hox
and there are 13 hox genes hox
and they get red in a certain order the
first ones get red and tell the the
little embryo this is your tail
uh which eventually goes away in humans
but we have a tail and then others your
midsection then this is your your upper
body then your neck and your head that's
what this hox does
and and eventually once you're born it
gets bundled away okay we don't need
those anymore we've built the body it's
got a head and a tail
hox is there but when we were looking at
older cells
in mice and in humans guess what
that bundle of hox developmental genes
started to
open up again because the sort of got
moved away and did some other things
during aging and now we've got
genes that tell us head to tail coming
on in our body when they shouldn't and
that's part of the problem with aging
which is genes getting turned on when
they should be kept off for decades
and then cells start to get confused
does the revealing of the wrong things
that unbundling
[Music]
does it happen because the sirtuins are
not
rebundling them or are they actively
going in and unbundling things that they
shouldn't
well what we think is happening is that
they physically
move away to other parts of the dna
molecule where they shouldn't normally
be that's the distraction
they get called away to do other things
they are very good at handling
emergencies these are emergency survival
proteins
that they have two roles one is to make
sure that everything's good every day
super optimal health stay young
but they also
through i think evolution
and very early in evolution their role
was to
put out the fire
uh and so they go away they actually
leave where they should
so that they're bundling and for a few
minutes until the emergency is fixed
they actually float away
go repair something so it might be a
broken chromosome somewhere else
over on another chromosome they go there
they fix it
and then somehow they find their way
back to make sure that bundle is
you know maintained but if you keep
doing that
and we every cell gets at least one
broken chromosome every day
and that's that's trillions in in our
body every day these fractures get i
call it distracted but basically they're
doing this other role putting out the
fire
and then coming back
if you do that for decades eventually
some of them they're lost they don't
find their way back and these loops that
shouldn't of dna that should never be
turned on start to come on
i may have been wrong then maybe
distracted isn't a metaphor it's they
literally have so much work to do which
would make sense and so now to actually
use a metaphor you talk about for people
that know what a cd is
uh that you would get these scratches in
your cds and it would cause the songs to
not play right
it was really obnoxious actually
and
that idea of aging
you're going to get these scratches
you're going to get the the fires that
have to be put out the certum is going
to get busy dealing with brakes and
whatever and so it's got to go handle
that put out that fire deal with that
break
um and
as we age there's an accumulation of
damage that we do and so these things
are constantly busy
and
therein lies
the information theory of aging that the
sirtuins are too busy to maintain the
integrity of the bundling of the dna in
a given region which will be different
everywhere
but it's no longer holding to the
integrity of just be a brain cell just
be a liver cell just be a pancreas cell
and
the readers are only instructed to read
what's exposed and so now if your brain
cell also
has a little bit sticking up for skin
cell or tail or whatever
now all of a sudden you have a
dysfunctional cell in your brain
that's aging as i see it that cells lose
their identity we call it x
differentiation which is an old theory
but this is what we've given a name to
it and so cells when you're
developing from an egg fertilized egg to
a baby to an adult that's called
differentiation okay cells get their
identity the bundles and loops get
established that's youth that's health
x differentiation is what happens after
that
but then the question is
with the scratches on the cd
can you get rid of them can you polish
them can you get those bundles that have
been exposed to go back
to where they came from and reset the
age of a cell
and get the brain to wake up and
remember
oh crap oh yeah i forgot i am actually a
brain cell or an eye cell
so this was the big question that i had
after figuring that other stuff out we
just talked about
was is there a backup copy of a youthful
epi genome what does that mean does the
cell know that that loop that's come out
that it needs to go back in
for that to be the first time
well we inherited that from
our parents that pattern does it
memorize that like okay if i'm a certain
am i only floating around a given area
so i know hey this is how it's supposed
to look so we get some signal that it's
like okay we're done growing head tail
bundle those back
and now this is what it should look like
forever
and
how would it know that
well what it what the cell does in part
is it puts chemical tags
on regions that need to be bundled up
known as methylation that's dna
methylation right
and you can also put methyls these
little chemicals hydrogens
uh on a carbon you can also put them on
those bundling proteins called histones
which we talked about beads on a string
can be modified but the most important
one for long-term maintenance
of the epigenome is this dna methylation
uh once you put a dna methyl carbon
hydrogen hydrogen on a dna
molecule which goes on the letter c not
all four but mostly it's on the c a
little bit on an a
then that tags that gene for a certain
behavior
mostly it means shut that gene down and
leave it alone
but over time
possibly due to sotuns moving away
perhaps other things
that dna methylation
pattern across the genome there are
millions of these little tags
starts to go away they're dissolved or
broken down somehow
well there are enzymes called dna
d-methyl lasers
that take them off
and they they start to do that job when
they shouldn't why would we do that job
ever what's the use case for that there
must be one
uh yeah well cells that come from stem
cells need to
grow into different cell types
we have stem cells that grow skin stem
cells that grow at all times yeah we
need those if we get damaged we need to
rebuild if you if i cut part of your
liver out it'll regrow into a new liver
because you've got stem cells our gut is
always replacing itself
because it's it's hitting all sorts of
things down there
so they're little stem cells but for
those stem cells to rebuild five or ten
different other cell types
you need to be able to
alter that pattern of dna methylation
even when you're an adult
but that system goes wrong in a way that
doesn't make us healthier it does the
opposite
it makes cells more stupid cells forget
what type of cell they should be and
that's x differentiation
but now the question is can you
redifferentiate can you get them to go
back
to the way they're simple stem cells if
stem cells are the ones that carry
that like
pluripotency of like we could become
anything because it sounds like i mean
to your point about the liver cell
there are already some that are doing
this that know no
the liver is gone
i know what i need to do though to
rebuild it yeah and so
is that just that that mechanism is
limited to the liver and the intestines
and therefore it's not doing that job
elsewhere or
well we could we could have reversed
aging just by making all cells
a stem cell we have the technology to do
that that was the 2016 nobel prize
yamanaka professor yamanaka discovered
that there are four genes that if you
put into adult cells will erase
all their identity all those loops and
bundles will just get erased those
methyls will get erased and you have a
primordial pluripotent stem cell and any
high school student can do that these
days just put four genes internally
insane okay but you don't want to do
that
because you would become the world's
biggest tumor
that doesn't sound fun yeah that's not
age reversal that's instant death
and if you do that in a mouse i i we
haven't done much of this but there are
labs that do this
uh the mice die within a couple of days
they just get riddled with tumors
well
over time if you do it a little bit they
get tumors but if you turn it up a lot
then the cells just forget what to do
and the mouse dies
even without tumors the cells just need
to know how to work
so you don't want to do the yamanaka
treatment in a living thing other than a
cell in the dish but we did stand on the
shoulders of professor yamanako because
we thought what if we could find a
combination of those genes
that doesn't take you all the way back
to zero to be a stem cell but it could
take you back to an earlier state
that would never go back to being a stem
cell because we don't want to get
cancer while we're getting younger
and so it'd be like polishing the
scratches on your cd
but make sure you don't do it too much
because you'll erase everything you've
got to maintain some surface
and it was a few years of work and i had
a student in the lab a brilliant
hard-working guy yuan cheng
liu
and yuan cheng was pretty frustrated he
kept putting genes into these old cells
in the dish
and they would turn cancerous or they
would die
that was one or two
outcomes of this this binary so they
would either replicate uncontrollably
yep without remembering when to shut off
or they just have to give up i'm out of
here this is too crazy
uh but we hit upon a magical combination
and he was literally about to quit his
phd he said i can't do this anymore whoa
i gotta change topics i'm i'm out of
here because it's never going to work
david you're insane you can't partially
reverse aging it's not going to work
and
he had every reason to believe that i
mean how crazy is it the the cell would
remember okay this gene here needs to go
back to that state and this gene over
here needs to do that
how could there be a memory in the cell
of youth and we didn't nobody knew until
we did the experiment
and the experiment that i said he should
do before he quits
was to don't use all four of these
yamanaka genes
and and in fact one of them causes
cancer we know that
so it didn't take too much of a genius
to say look just leave out that gene
it's called c mick
and see if the other three would work
and no one knew if three was sufficient
most people thought it wasn't
and he put those three genes in and
they're called o
for oct4 sox2 s and klf4 osk
and if you're wondering what do these
genes actually do they make proteins
that turn genes on and off during
development right starting to see the
theme here and they work with sirtuins
and those dna methods all right so you
put in those three genes into old human
cells in the dish
and they they looked fine they kept
growing they didn't turn into a tumor
they didn't grow uncontrollably and they
didn't die
and then when he measured the patterns
of which genes were on and off
they resembled a young cell again
and that was a eureka moment in the lab
i would say we could reverse aging in
the skin in a dish
but the real experiment that changed
everything was
he then made a virus a domesticated
virus we call it an aav
and he could now deliver those genes
into a living organism
which in our case is typically an old
mouse
and he did a very clever thing he said i
want to work on the eye his father had a
biotech company that that is trying to
solve um blindness cue blindness
and i said the eye you're kidding me i
know nothing about the eye
blindness has never been cured
uh
you know
how's it gonna be possible to deliver
this into an eye
let's just do the liver i understand the
liver it's it's easy we'll just get it
in he said no trust me i've got the good
feeling about the eye right all right
fine and i've learned over the years if
somebody really wants to do something
let them go do it and usually they're
right
there's this thing in science where you
have this gut feeling but you're not
really sure where it's coming from
so there's a spirituality yeah
and i've learned to tap into that as do
students it's one of the things i teach
them
so he took an old mouse actually the
first experiment was he actually
caused the mouse to become blind
and then he put the virus into the eye
just
straight in turned on his three
yamanaka genes osnk
uh
and then he looked four weeks later
at what happened in that eye
and he found out that the optic nerve
that was damaged
started and for the most part grew back
and that never happens optic nerves
don't grow back if you go blind from
damaging your eye you're not going to
see again
same with your spinal cord same with
your brain damage the central nervous
system with nerves in your body does not
grow back
it's a fact of biology and here was one
change showing
he was able to do that so why is that
relevant to aging because when you're
very young
if you damage your optic nerve
or even your spine or your brain it can
grow back but we lose that ability as we
get older and he was juan cheng taking
the eye back so young
that it could regenerate and function
but then he did something very clever
he then put it into a mouse that we gave
glaucoma to so pressure in the eye
damages vision
and then he also did it to old mice that
had just aged and were blind as well
and he started to cure blindness with
his treatment
and we could now measure the age of
those nerve cells and they were
literally younger and those those
bundles and those loops we can measure
those and the dna methylation the
chemicals we can measure those
and he was sending them back
75-80 percent of their age but not to
zero
or not 100
so he sent me that i i don't know if
i've still got it on my phone but it's
recorded in my book
because uh
he sent me this text that said
david i've got to show you these photos
and he sent me an image of the nerve
which is a long
strand it's orange we stained it orange
so you can see it
and the damaged one just looked like
there were a few dead cells but the one
that was reprogrammed
was bright orange all the cells almost
all had survived the damage and then
they started to grow back towards the
brain from the eye of the brain and you
could see it's like a jellyfish tail and
he sent me pictures of that
and he said i thought i was going to
fail
but do you see what i'm seeing and i
said yeah i see it
what are you seeing i said the future
wow
and that lit is literally what we saw so
now we know you can reprogram
other tissues it doesn't have to be the
optic nerve it can be the retina it can
be
the cone cells of the eye
and so we're
reversing aging of the eye that's not
hard at all
but we can reverse the age of the liver
the skin
other labs are doing the spleen
thymus
through this method
so it's it seems to be
a somewhat if not
universal method of resetting the age of
the body
safely
safely is the key
and because i started a biotech company
called life biosciences that wants to
cure blindness and other age-related
diseases using this method
for the last two and a half years we've
been doing safety studies
in mice and now we're in non-human
primates and those animals are fine we
can blast these three genes
in the animal and they're fine they
don't get tumors
their eyes are healthy
you don't get uh malformation of the eye
so it's great we lucked out humanity
lucked out that we can actually do this
and that there's a backup copy of youth
in each of our cells that can be
tapped into
that's crazy do we know what is going on
that allows it to realize what it's
supposed to look like what the bundling
of that cell is supposed to look like
because that is what's going on right it
suddenly remembers up these are sticking
out they shouldn't right and how do we
go from it has so many fires to put out
that it's just roaming all over the
place and it can't get back how do we
sort of give it that breather to come
back and go not only do i remember how
to bundle this but i've got the time to
dedicate
to bundling it correctly again
well the bundling it takes a few days um
and
a week you're getting pretty close a
month you've now got vision back
um and then actually by the way if you
stop the treatment we now i didn't know
this when we talked last but
when you stop the treatment it's long
lasting that mouse will still have young
eyes six months later
and i always not i still do i want to
test how many times can you reset
uh because if it's if it's once it's
interesting if it's 100 times it's super
interesting no joke
and we we couldn't do that experiment
because the mice were dying from old age
with super young eyes
so we got to reset once but now we're
resetting
entire mice
and by the way you mentioned earlier the
quote from my podcast we can actually
control aging in the other direction we
now know how to distract and move the
sortuans away we cut chromosomes and let
them move away
and those gene packages
open up the same as aging so we can make
a mouse
poor things that we can make them age
rapidly so if you were to come to my lab
i could show you a mouse that's a twin
and it's brother let's say brother and
sister the brother will be 50 older than
his sister but they were born on the
same day whoa
and now we're reversing the age of those
mice
our main mouse is called lisa by
coincidence and we're taking lisa and
we're going to rejuvenate her uh so that
she hopefully gets back to being so
better up and now you want to see if you
can take her back jesus man like this is
i mean you said that this is going to be
remembered as the moment that human
history changed i mean but that's crazy
if this ends up working out like this is
really bananas
so aging actually has been worked on for
about 5 000 years or more and just in
the last 20 years we've come up
with a set of hallmarks of aging there
are about eight of them and i think many
of your viewers will know that there's
telomere attrition the ends of
chromosomes get shorter mitochondria the
power packs we run out of energy as we
get older there's a list a long laundry
list and most of the people in in my
field have said okay we've we've figured
out aging we've got this list we put in
a nice pie chart and that's it but what
i'm saying is that
why does all that stuff happen it's not
enough just to tick off what happens you
have to understand is there an upstream
cause of all of that
and so in in my book and in scientific
papers we are now putting out for the
scientific community to read as well
what we think is going on is that
our bodies are losing essential
information as we get older that drives
many if not all of those hallmarks that
we know exist
so what in what way is the epigenome
involved in this how are we losing the
information give people a quick little
diatribe about the difference between
genetics which i think they get and then
the epigenome and epigenetics and and
how that plays out yeah yeah for sure
it's not that complicated there's really
just two main types of information in
our body that we get from our parents
the first is genetic we all know about
dna and the four letters atcg uh it's a
long molecule in cell and it's a string
of letters that's digital that's like
the music that's on on a dvd those
things we used to use uh to store movies
but there's another level of information
that's above that in cells which is the
reader of the information that's called
the epigenome
and that really is different because
it's analog information
in the same way that
records and cassette tapes
they sucked they were terrible at
storing information but the problem is
we have an analog version of information
the epigenome which controls which genes
in the string of dna are turned on and
off and that's why are you considering
that analog i don't think i understand
how it actually works like i can imagine
dna sequences as just sort of repeating
the atcg
code but what is analog about the
epigenome this
reading about it in your book is the
first time that
i began to imagine it in a different way
well it's very clear that that if you
just have four letters that's digital so
we understand that but the epigenome
is
the structure of how the dna is
organized so dna isn't just flailing
around like a string it's actually
packaged up around proteins we call
histones and it's like if you spool your
hose in the garden you loop it around
and then you can put those loops into
bigger structures then you get a
chromosome which you can see any high
school student can see under a
microscope that's that chromatin
structure as we call it is the epigenome
and so when when the hose is looped
tightly and spooled up that's stopping
genes from being red so genes are off
when they're compacted but also if the
cell needs to read certain genes and a
nerve cell needs to read the nerve cell
genes and the liver cell needs to read
specifically the liver cell genes and so
they open those ones up and now the cell
can get access and read those that's an
analog system because it it's varying
all the time it changes when you wake up
what you eat so it is literally the
amount that the um
the dna is unspooled
and the place in which it is unspooled
so that it can be read
right and that's what determines the
cell's function and identity which we
you know when we're born where 26
billion cells each one of those cells
knows what it is and what it has to be
80 years later it and its descendants
and over time what i'm saying is aging
is caused because cells lose their
packaging and then eventually cells lose
their identity disease ensure ensues
cells check out they become zombie-like
and they're now in essence right
senescence and then our organs fail and
we die
but until recently we had no idea why
that was happening
and so why is it happening
well so the the packaging is the really
important part because much like the
software runs the code the epigenome
controls which genes are on and off
and if you stress the system and by that
i mean biological stress and the biggest
stress you can cause to a cell is to
break its chromosome because it's going
to die if that if it doesn't fix it or
worse
for the body you get a tumor so the cell
has to hunker down stop dividing arrest
just about everything it's doing
and then try to repair that broken dna
but in doing so it has to do two things
first of all it has to take proteins
from somewhere else that are doing a
good job
keeping the cell from functioning or
making sure the cell's functioning
correctly and those proteins are used by
the cell to repair the dna that's broken
but also what's happening at the break
is that that's all opening up as well
because you
remember if you break a dna and it's
spooled up you can't fix it you can't
glue it back together unless you unpack
it
stick it back together and then you've
got to repack it
so this movement of proteins and the
unpacking repacking of the dna
i believe leads to cells losing that
original youthful what we call a gene
expression pattern of how the genes are
turned on and off and nerve cells as
they get older lose their ability to
stay nerve cells and liver cells lose
their identity as liver cells
all right so
do
proteins the way that you're talking
about them sound like little creatures
i think of them because of my background
like powder like just sort of inert
molecules which clearly judging by the
way that you're talking about them
they're not i've seen them animated
before as having like articulatable
shapes and they actually move
is that accurate
that's essentially it it's it's super
exciting when you realize that proteins
aren't just blobs or powders in the cell
they're actually little little machines
like pac-man that go around and they can
change the function of other things they
can package the dna
and what they they do is they create
chemical reactions that normally would
take a billion years to happen
this is what an enzyme does it
accelerates reactions and so we've got
about twenty thousand different types of
enzymes in the body
and they do different things but what
we've discovered over the last 20 years
is there are certain types of enzymes
that help package the dna
and help with the dna repair these are
the ones that doing the ping pong game
and without those
we're screwed we basically will will age
more rapidly
conversely what's really exciting is is
we've discovered that you can make them
more active to make sure the dna is
packaged correctly and the repair is
very efficient and
there are ways you can do that exercise
dieting being hungry
they allow these enzymes that control
our body and make us healthier they make
those enzymes much more active so
instead of a pacman doing this
you exercise your diet
take them take a molecule that we work
on and it'll go around and fix
everything much more efficiently and
keep you younger for longer we think why
do you use the pac-man analogy which
makes me think of it's eating something
is that what's happening is it eating
cells that have a level of senescence or
is it uh more bob the builder and it's
going around tearing some things apart
putting some things back together yeah
it's more like bob the builder but i
think a good example for at least the
enzymes that we work on called sirtuins
that protect the body
they're like a little tiny pair of
scissors they chip up clip off chemicals
called acetyls and in doing so when they
clip off the acetyls off those packaging
proteins the dna gets more compact and
that's called gene silencing and over
time
as we get older and through this dna
damage process
the sirtuins get inactive they're
distracted by dna repair and the
packaging of that dna that that hose
spooling
starts to loosen and now genes that have
no business being on in the brain
come on
and partly i believe that's why we we
have these diseases of the brain
[__] that's so interesting um okay so
one i want to know from a lifestyle
perspective what are we doing that's
speeding that up and then two
what can we
do from a lifestyle perspective to begin
slowing that down or reversing it
well so i've been studying these enzymes
the sirtuins we have seven in our bodies
i've been studying them for about 25
years
and what we've learned is that they
respond to the cellular
environment
there's a chemical that they require for
gas think of them as the fuel called nad
and there's another molecule that is
like the accelerator on the enzymes uh
that makes them going even faster and
that's one of them is called resveratrol
which we discovered years ago from red
wine and together they actually do
really great things on these enzymes and
make them keep the body younger at least
for 25 years we've been studying mostly
animals
and even little fungi yi cells and what
we've learned from those studies is that
these are largely
involved in responding to when organisms
are under threat of survival
so how do you make the body feel like
it's under threat
adversity
so one is run a lot or at least become
out of breath you know a few times a
week your body will say oh man
we had we had to outpace one of those
saber-toothed cats again gotta build up
the body um the other is to be hungry
either a couple of times a week or every
day you know skip a meal or two and then
your body will turn on these sirtuins
make more of that fuel nad for the
enzymes and we think
that's what's
in part responsible for the health
benefits of those uh lifestyle choices
all right one thing though that you talk
about that i found really interesting is
this notion of what may be good for you
when you're young may come back to bite
you in the ass when you're older yeah so
it's like the whole notion of hormesis
that a little bit of bad is actually
extraordinarily good which is exactly
what you're describing now get out of
breath do all the stuff and so when the
information started pouring out that the
only thing across every known um living
organism that extends lifespan is to eat
less which you talk about in your own
book it feels like you're saying to do
it for that reason just don't put as
much stress on the system but now i hear
you saying no no what you actually want
to do is stress the system won't that
stress
of i just ran from a lion a [__] i'm
starving won't that begin to stack up
and become problematic
well actually if you step on a snail
it's going to die so
there's certain amounts of stress that
that you don't want to do but what you
want to do is
get the body to fear adversity and the
future but not enough to cause lasting
damage or the unspooling of the dna
that'll lead to disease and eventually
death so you you don't want to overdo it
you want to be a little bit puffed you
want to be a little bit hungry but of
course starvation malnutrition is not
going to make you live longer so it's a
fine line and what we've learned from
many animal studies and increasing
numbers of clinical trials in humans is
that you want to pulse it let the body
recover not constant we used to make
animals go hungry all their lives and it
worked but it actually works better if
you let them recover and i think that's
that's the secret then let's really dive
into that so i'm guessing you're talking
about where um animals were denied
something like 20 to 30 of their caloric
intake for very long periods of time is
extending their life by what like 30 or
something um so super interesting but
you're saying that if their caloric
intake over a long period of time is
roughly the same of an animal that's
just allowed to eat until it's satiated
that if it's done in a pulse pattern of
hunger
and almost over feed
they actually have the same benefits as
the animal that has a chronic deficit of
calories
all right well well let's be clear
nobody knows what the perfect diet is
even when it comes to fasting it's all
largely based on rodent studies so what
i can tell you about the rodent studies
which i'm very familiar with
is that if you take a rodent and reduce
its calories by 25
for its whole life
it will live longer 30
but it'll be really miserable and
aggressive uh and that's true for us as
well i've tried calorie restriction for
about a week and i gave up i was pretty
angry but what we discovered our my
colleagues um discovered is that if you
it's not just what you eat it's when you
eat that's important and what's been
found is that if as long as you have
that period of hunger
um in a mouse so you can feed them every
other day
then they can gorge themselves as much
as they want and they do they eat about
of what a mouse
having free access to food would eat
but they
they have the same longevity benefit as
a mouse that's always been hungry and if
that's true what that means is for us is
that we can enjoy life as long as we
have that period of hunger once a day or
maybe twice a week and i believe the
only reason we age
you know we could live for a thousand
years
otherwise the only reason we age is that
our repair systems
become complacent
you mentioned that what
what is beneficial for you when you're
young come back to bite you when you're
old what we think is that these repair
systems are very good when we're young
so the idea is it's called antagonistic
pleiotropy and i think it's right and
that is that we evolved to stay healthy
and alive and fit till we're 40
and then the forces of natural selection
decline after that because we've
essentially bred
we've often had children
but we don't need to stick around beyond
that and building a body that will last
a thousand years is pointless at that
you know so most species only live as
long as they need to to reproduce and
then a little bit more
if you're a mouse that could die within
two years they only build a body that
lasts two years if you're a whale that
has no predators you can live for a
couple of hundred years that makes more
sense
why why does the whale live for a couple
hundred years like i would say it's
pretty safe to say certainly um at some
point in our past we became a pretty
clear apex predator it's not that things
couldn't take us out but i mean by and
large obviously look at how far we've
come they didn't so why would we only
live to 40 is that whales continue to
breed and be useful in that sense
so that's really super interesting and
very few people talk about this
the reason is that we were not at the
apex of the food chain until recently
but in a world where we typically would
die from starvation or from war a lot of
men didn't make it to 40 because of that
we were at the middle of the food chain
only now we we actually barely have a
chance of dying
before 70 or 80 unless we're unlucky
give us another 5 million years of
evolution we could evolve 200-year
lifespans that's what should happen if
evolution continues
a whale has been at the apex for about
30 million years and they've been
allowed to evolve those long life spans
we are just like them we share most of
their genes they're warm-blooded they
produce milk they're conscious they're
basically us in the sea so anyone who
says we've reached our maximum limit
doesn't know what they're talking about
you and i have to eat 30 percent more
calories every day
just to make our normal amount of atp
and you go well why would i do that well
it turns out
generating heat is what those
calories do
and you and i are warm-blooded animals